---
title: 'Steps to set docker environment'
date: 2022-12-14
permalink: /posts/2022/12/set-docker-environment/
tags:
  - docker
  - basic usage
---

This is a blog post that records the steps to set environment before I successfully trained and run a deep learning model in a docker container. Docker offers an isolated environment for software and dependencies and ensure the application runs quickly and reliably from one computing environment to another, by using container technology. See the difference between docker container and virtual machine in https://www.docker.com/resources/what-container/.
Have docker installed on the host computer, build docker environment following steps below.

Create a container and set up environment
======
Open a terminal on host computer and pull a docker image e.g. ubuntu 18.04.

Create & enter a container
------
'''
docker pull ubuntu:18.04
docker images # list all the images
docker run -it --shm-size 6G --gpus all --name [container name] -e NVIDIA_DRIVER_CAPABILITIES=compute,utility -e NVIDIA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=all [image id]  # create a container with access to nvidia GPU  # refer to https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/cloud-native/container-toolkit/install-guide.html#setting-up-nvidia-container-toolkit if unable to locate 
docker cp [file path] [container id]:/home  # pass files from the host to container
docker exec -it [container id] bash # enter the container
'''

Install base utilities
------
Now you are in a docker container. Time to install software!
'''
apt-get update 
apt-get install -y build-essential
apt-get install -y wget
apt-get clean
'''

Install miniconda 
------
In case that you need run projects in different python version, create a conda environment.
'''
cd home 
mkdir download && cd download
wget --quiet https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh  
export PATH=$PATH:/root/anaconda3/bin
'''

Install cuda
------
Install cuda if you use Nvidia card. Choose the right cuda version.
'''
cd home/download
wget https://developer.download.nvidia.com/compute/cuda/11.3.0/local_installers/cuda_11.3.0_465.19.01_linux.run
sh cuda_11.3.0_465.19.01_linux.run # install the dependencies if needed, and choose to install cuda-11.3 only is enough (do not install GPU driver)
'''

Link libs
------
Export paths to your current environment. Here I use vim to edit ~/.bashrc file, add three lines, save changes and exit vim editor.
'''
apt-get install vim 
vi ~/.bashrc # add the following 3 lines to .bashrc 
export LD_LABRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:/usr/local/cuda-11.3/lib64
export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/cuda-11.3/bin
export CUDA_HOME=$CUDA_HOME:/usr/local/cuda-11.3
'''
Don't forget to source ~/.bashrc and the check the cuda installation.

'''
source  ~/.bashrc
nvcc -V #check the cuda version
'''

Now you can

Trouble shooting
======

Docker images and containers are saved in /var/lib/docker by default, usually the space is not enough. 

One way to change the files' location:
------

Check the size of each image and container
'''docker system df -v'''

Stop docker service and copy docker files to the new directory (e.g. /home/docker/lib/)
'''
systemctl stop docker 
rsync -r -avz /var/lib/docker /home/docker/lib/
mv /var/lib/docker /var/lib/docker-old
ln -s /home/docker/lib/docker /var/lib/
systemctl start docker  # check images and containers, delete /var/lib/docker-old if everything is OK
'''

Runtime error: dataloader's workers are out of shared memory.
------
'''
df -h | grep shm  # check the shared memory
service docker stop
cd /var/lib/docker/containers/[container id]
vim hostconfig.json # set shm-size to a bigger number
service docker start
'''

Not found containers
------
'''
#try to link the directories again
ln -s /home/docker/lib/docker /var/lib/
sudo rm -rf /var/lib/docker
'''

Summary
======
This is the basic pipeline to makes things happen in docker container. Find more advanced operations such as dockerfile usage, root permission settings on your own if needed. Things should be easier since you have the initial momentum. Cheers!
